Debugging support in rustc (#316)
rust-lang/rustc-guide: src/debugging-support-in-rustc.md

This program may live in the compiler itself.  DWARF uses a data structure called 
Debugging Information Entry (DIE) which stores the information as "tags" to denote functions, 
variables etc., e.g., `DW_TAG_variable`, `DW_TAG_pointer_type`, `DW_TAG_subprogram` etc. 
You can also invent your own tags and attributes.

## Supported debuggers

### GDB

We have our own fork of GDB - [https://github.com/rust-dev-tools/gdb]

#### Rust expression parser

To be able to show debug output we need expression parser. 
This expression parser is written in [Bison] and is only a subset of Rust expressions. 
This means that this parser can parse only a subset of Rust expressions. 
Parser was written from scratch and has no relation to any other parser. 
For example, this parser is not related to Rustc's parser.

GDB has Rust like value and type output. It can print values and types in a way 
that look like Rust syntax in the output. Or when you print a type as [ptype] in GDB, 
it also looks like Rust source code. Checkout the documentation in the [manual for GDB/Rust]. 
The [manual for GDB/Rust] lists some limitations as well.

#### Parser extensions

> Expression parser has a couple of extensions [TODO: Where are the extensions???] in it 

Author: GDB: Need the location of extensions in the respective code.

> to facilitate features that you cannot do with Rust [TODO: CHECK: Find out what cannot be done?].

Author: Not sure what cannot be done but this was mentioned by @tromey in the video. Perhaps he did explain later which I have noted in this document below, but I still am not sure if there is something more to this.

Reviewer: gdb's Rust extensions and limitations are documented in the gdb manual: https://sourceware.org/gdb/onlinedocs/gdb/Rust.html -- however, this neglects to mention that gdb convenience variables and registers follow the gdb `$` convention, and that the Rust parser implements the gdb `@` extension.

Author: > however, this neglects to mention that gdb convenience variables and registers follow the gdb $ convention, and that the Rust parser implements the gdb @ extension.

@tromey do you think we should mention this part in the GDB-Rust document rather than this document so there is no duplication etc.?

In other words, it has enum support as well.

#### Developer notes

* None of the LLDB work is upstream. This [rust-lang/lldb wiki page] explains a few details. 
* The reason for forking LLDB is that LLDB recently removed all the other language plugins 
due to lack of maintenance.
* LLDB has a plugin architecture but that does not work for language support. 
* This is built on macOS because it was easier to solve. 
* Tom has a possible solution which can enable us to ship LLDB everywhere. 
* GDB generally works better on Linux.

## DWARF and Rustc

[DWARF] is the standard way compilers generate debugging information that debuggers read. 
It is _the_ debugging format on macOS and Linux. It is a multi-language, extensible format 
and is mostly good enough for Rust's purposes. Hence, the current implementation reuses DWARF's 
concepts. This is true even if some of the concepts in DWARF do not align with Rust
semantically because generally there can be some kind of mapping between the two.

We have some DWARF extensions that the Rust compiler emits and the debuggers understand that 
are _not_ in the DWARF standard.

* vtable thing
* .... Does not remember...

> [TODO: Ask Tom for this? they are documented in debuggers in comments or LLVM in comments]

Author: @tromey Can you point out the location of these extensions please?

Reviewer: They are only documented as comments in the LLVM (and maybe gdb and lldb) source.

The vtable thing is that the Rust compiler will emit DWARF for a virtual table, and this vtable object will have a `DW_AT_containing_type` that points to the real type.  This lets debuggers dissect a trait object pointer to correctly find the payload.  E.g., here's such a DIE, from a test case in the gdb repository:

```
 <1><1a9>: Abbrev Number: 3 (DW_TAG_structure_type)
    <1aa>   DW_AT_containing_type: <0x1b4>
    <1ae>   DW_AT_name        : (indirect string, offset: 0x23d): vtable
    <1b2>   DW_AT_byte_size   : 0
    <1b3>   DW_AT_alignment   : 8
```

The other extension that I remember is that the Rust compiler can emit a tagless discriminated union.  I filed a DWARF feature request for this: http://dwarfstd.org/ShowIssue.php?issue=180517.2

fields with `__0` and debuggers look for a sequence of such names to overcome this limitation. 
For example, in this case the debugger would look at a field via `x.__0` instead of `x.0`. 
This is resolved via the Rust parser in the debugger so now you can do `x.0`.

DWARF relies on debuggers to know some information about platform ABI. 
Rust does not do that all the time.

## Developer notes

This section is from the talk about certain aspects of development.

### What is missing

#### Ship GDB in Rustup

PR and issue: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/34457

Shipping GDB requires change to Rustup delivery system, so that GDB could be built as its own 
entity so that the artifacts that are created that way can be stuck into rustup without requiring 
it to be part of one giant Rust build. However, if we can ship GDB with rustup, it will simplify
the development process by having compiler emit new debug info.

Main issue is setting up dependencies. One such dependency is Python. That is why we have our 
own fork of GDB because one of the drivers is patched on Rust's side to check the correct 
version of Python (Python 2.7 in this case).

> [TODO: Tom relies of commong denominator - Python 2.7. But its end-of-life is near. confirm]

Author: In the video, @tromey says that the common denominator used here was Python 2.7. Given that Python 2.7 is going to retire by the end of this year (https://pythonclock.org/), maybe we should think about moving to 3.x?

Reviewer: The main driver for choosing 2.7 for Linux builds -- a project I never finished -- was that it's difficult otherwise to build a version that will work everywhere.  Unfortunately the Python stable ABI (https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/stable.html) doesn't seem sufficient for gdb's needs.

This is to keep updates to debugger as fast as we make changes to the debugging symbols.
In essence, to ship the debugger as soon as new debugging info is added. GDB only releases 
every six months or so and is comparably slower release cycle. However, the changes that are
not related to Rust itself should ideally be first merged to upstream eventually.

#### Code signing for LLDB debug server on macOS

SIP: System Integrity Protection. 

> Debug on macOS has a feature called SIP [TODO: CHECK: What is SIP and link to it]. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
macOS has a security feature called [System Integrity Protection](https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/releasenotes/MacOSX/WhatsNewInOSX/Articles/MacOSX10_11.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40016227-SW11) or SIP.
```

Author: ah! saw this after made the change but will incorporate this into my changes. Thank you!

Rustc+LLVM hand-off - For this type I call these LLVM debug info builder methods to construct
representation of this type.

* First LLVM needs changing.
  * LLVM does not emit Interface types at all, so this needs to be implemented in the LLVM.
  * Get sign off on LLVM maintainers that this is a good idea.
* Then change the DWARF extension.
* Then update the debuggers.
  * DWARF readers, expression evaluators.
* Then update Rust compiler. Change it to emit this new information.

#### Procedural macro stepping

How do you actually debug a procedural macro? Lots to be discussed here. 

What is the location you emit for a macro expansion? 
* You can emit location of the invocation of the macro.
* You can emit the location of the definition of the macro.
* You can emit locations of the content of the macro.

RFC: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2117

The idea is the let macros decide what to do by having some kind of attribute that lets the 
macro tell the compiler where the line marker should be. This affects where you set the 
breakpoints and what happens when you step it.

### Future work

#### Name mangling changes

* New demangler in `libiberty` (gcc source tree).

> * New demangler in LLVM or LLDB [TODO: CHECK: where is the demangler these days]

Author: Need location of this said `demangler`.

[This comment by Tom](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-guide/pull/316#discussion_r284027340)
> gdb's Rust extensions and limitations are documented in the gdb manual:
https://sourceware.org/gdb/onlinedocs/gdb/Rust.html -- however, this neglects to mention that
gdb convenience variables and registers follow the gdb $ convention, and that the Rust parser
implements the gdb @ extension.

[This question by Aman](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-guide/pull/316#discussion_r285401353)
> @tromey do you think we should mention this part in the GDB-Rust document rather than this
document so there is no duplication etc.?

#### Developer notes

* This work is now upstream. Bugs can be reported in [GDB Bugzilla].

### LLDB

We have our own fork of LLDB - [https://github.com/rust-lang/lldb]

Fork of LLVM project - [https://github.com/rust-lang/llvm-project]

#### Rust expression parser

This expression parser is written in C++. It is a type of [Recursive Descent parser].
Implements slightly less of the Rust language than GDB. LLDB has Rust like value and type output.

#### Parser extensions

There is some special code in the DWARF reader in LLDB to support the extensions.

> A couple of examples of DWARF reader support needed are as follows -

Author: This is my belief. 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/160476/59726940-a2796c80-9201-11e9-9a95-3a321dacdd38.png)

vs

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/160476/59726964-be7d0e00-9201-11e9-9390-e65ab53385a1.png)

Tom can perhaps shed more light.

1. Enum: Needed for support for enum types. The Rustc writes the information about
enum into DWARF and LLDB reads the DWARF to understand where is the tag field or
is there a tag field or is the tag slot shared with non-zero optimization etc.
In other words, it has enum support as well.

#### Developer notes

* None of the LLDB work is upstream. This [rust-lang/lldb wiki page] explains a few details.
* The reason for forking LLDB is that LLDB recently removed all the other language plugins
due to lack of maintenance.
* LLDB has a plugin architecture but that does not work for language support.

> * This is built on macOS because it was easier to solve.

Author: I fixed it.

* GDB generally works better on Linux.

## DWARF and Rustc

[DWARF] is the standard way compilers generate debugging information that debuggers read.
It is _the_ debugging format on macOS and Linux. It is a multi-language, extensible format
and is mostly good enough for Rust's purposes. Hence, the current implementation reuses DWARF's
concepts. This is true even if some of the concepts in DWARF do not align with Rust
semantically because generally there can be some kind of mapping between the two.

We have some DWARF extensions that the Rust compiler emits and the debuggers understand that
are _not_ in the DWARF standard.

* Rust compiler will emit DWARF for a virtual table, and this `vtable` object will have a
  `DW_AT_containing_type` that points to the real type. This lets debuggers dissect a trait object
   pointer to correctly find the payload. E.g., here's such a DIE, from a test case in the gdb
   repository:

   ```asm
   <1><1a9>: Abbrev Number: 3 (DW_TAG_structure_type)
      <1aa>   DW_AT_containing_type: <0x1b4>
      <1ae>   DW_AT_name        : (indirect string, offset: 0x23d): vtable
      <1b2>   DW_AT_byte_size   : 0
      <1b3>   DW_AT_alignment   : 8
   ```

> * The other extension that is that the Rust compiler can emit a tagless discriminated union.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The other extension is that the Rust compiler can emit a tagless discriminated union.
```

  See [DWARF feature request] for this item.

### Current limitations of DWARF

* Traits - require a bigger change than normal to DWARF, on how to represent Traits in DWARF.
* DWARF provides no way to differentiate between Structs and Tuples. Rust compiler emits
fields with `__0` and debuggers look for a sequence of such names to overcome this limitation.
For example, in this case the debugger would look at a field via `x.__0` instead of `x.0`.
This is resolved via the Rust parser in the debugger so now you can do `x.0`.

DWARF relies on debuggers to know some information about platform ABI.
Rust does not do that all the time.

## Developer notes

This section is from the talk about certain aspects of development.

> ### What is missing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## What is missing
```

> #### Shipping GDB in Rustup

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Shipping GDB in Rustup
```

> PR and issue: [https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/34457]

Author: Fixed. Changed to `Tracking issue`.

Shipping GDB requires change to Rustup delivery system. To manage Rustup build size and
times we need to build GDB separately, on its own and somehow provide the artifacts produced
to be included in the final build. However, if we can ship GDB with rustup, it will simplify
the development process by having compiler emit new debug info which can be readily consumed.

Main issue in achieving this is setting up dependencies. One such dependency is Python. That
is why we have our own fork of GDB because one of the drivers is patched on Rust's side to
check the correct version of Python (Python 2.7 in this case. *Note: Python3 is not chosen
for this purpose because Python's stable ABI is limited and is not sufficient for GDB's needs.
See [https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/stable.html]*).

> This is to keep updates to debugger as fast as we make changes to the debugging symbols.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is to keep updates to debugger as fast as possible as we make changes to the debugging symbols.
```

In essence, to ship the debugger as soon as new debugging info is added. GDB only releases

> every six months or so and is comparably slower release cycle. However, the changes that are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
every six months or so. However, the changes that are
```

not related to Rust itself should ideally be first merged to upstream eventually.

> #### Code signing for LLDB debug server on macOS

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Code signing for LLDB debug server on macOS
```

According to Wikipedia, [System Integrity Protection] is

> System Integrity Protection (SIP, sometimes referred to as rootless) is a security feature
> of Apple's macOS operating system introduced in OS X El Capitan. It comprises a number of
> mechanisms that are enforced by the kernel. A centerpiece is the protection of system-owned
> files and directories against modifications by processes without a specific "entitlement",
> even when executed by the root user or a user with root privileges (sudo).

It prevents processes using `ptrace` syscall. If a process wants to use `ptrace` it has to be
code signed. The certificate that signs it has to be trusted on your machine.

See [Apple developer documentation for System Integrity Protection].

We may need to sign up with Apple and get the keys to do this signing. Tom has looked into if

> Mozilla can do this but Mozilla cannot because Mozilla is at the maximum number of things that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mozilla cannot do this because it is at the maximum number of
```

> keys Mozilla has are allowed to sign. Tom does not know if Mozilla could get more keys.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
keys it is allowed to sign. Tom does not know if Mozilla could get more keys.
```

Alternatively, Tom suggests that maybe a Rust legal entity is needed to get the keys via Apple.
This problem is not technical in nature. If we had such a key we could sign GDB as well and
ship that.

> #### DWARF and Traits

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### DWARF and Traits
```

Rust traits are not emitted into DWARF at all. The impact of this is calling a method `x.method()`
does not work as is. The reason being that method is implemented by a trait, as opposed
to a type. That information is not present so finding trait methods is missing.

DWARF has a notion of interface types (possibly added for Java). Tom's idea was to use this
interface type as traits.

DWARF only deals with concrete names, not the reference types. So, a given implementation of a
trait for a type would be one of these interfaces (`DW_tag_interface` type). Also, the type for
which it is implemented would describe all the interfaces this type implements. This requires a
DWARF extension.

Issue on Github: [https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/33014]

> ##### Typical process for a Debug Info change (LLVM)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Typical process for a Debug Info change (LLVM)
```

Reviewer 3: Could you move this too a new section after the `Procedural macro stepping` section?

LLVM has Debug Info (DI) builders. This is the primary thing that Rust calls into.
This is why we need to change LLVM first because that is emitted first and not DWARF directly.
This is a kind of metadata that you construct and hand-off to LLVM. For the Rustc/LLVM hand-off
some LLVM DI builder methods are called to construct representation of a type.

The steps of this process are as follows -

1. LLVM needs changing.

   LLVM does not emit Interface types at all, so this needs to be implemented in the LLVM first.

   Get sign off on LLVM maintainers that this is a good idea.

2. Change the DWARF extension.

3. Update the debuggers.

   Update DWARF readers, expression evaluators.

4. Update Rust compiler.

   Change it to emit this new information.

> #### Procedural macro stepping

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Procedural macro stepping
```

A deeply profound question is that how do you actually debug a procedural macro?
What is the location you emit for a macro expansion? Consider some of the following cases -

* You can emit location of the invocation of the macro.
* You can emit the location of the definition of the macro.
* You can emit locations of the content of the macro.

RFC: [https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/2117]

Focus is to let macros decide what to do. This can be achieved by having some kind of attribute
that lets the macro tell the compiler where the line marker should be. This affects where you
set the breakpoints and what happens when you step it.

> ### Future work

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Future work
```

Reviewer 3: Also, could you remove one `#` from the headers below?

#### Name mangling changes

* New demangler in `libiberty` (gcc source tree).
* New demangler in LLVM or LLDB.

**TODO**: Check the location of the demangler source.
[Question on Github](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-guide/pull/316#discussion_r283062536).

#### Reuse Rust compiler for expressions

> This is an importand idea because debuggers by and large do not try to implement type

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is an important idea because debuggers by and large do not try to implement type
```
